



RTGWG Working Group                                           J. Halpern
Internet-Draft                                                       HPE
Intended status: Standards Track                               A. Alston
Expires: 28 March 2027                           Equity Technology Group
                                                       24 September 2026


                      The IGP is not a Dump Truck
              draft-halpern-rtgwg-not-a-dump-truck-latest

Abstract

   This document explores addressing the problem of using an IGP to
   carry arbitrary information, often referred to using the phrase "the
   IGP is not a dump truck".  It describes the kinds of information
   carried in an IGP and proposes an approach to changing the system.

Discussion Venues

   This note is to be removed before publishing as an RFC.

   Discussion of this document takes place on the Routing Area Working
   Group Working Group mailing list (rtgwg@ietf.org), which is archived
   at https://mailarchive.ietf.org/arch/browse/rtgwg/.

   Source for this draft and an issue tracker can be found at
   https://github.com/JoelHalpern/Offloading-Dumptruck.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at https://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on 28 March 2027.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2026 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents (https://trustee.ietf.org/
   license-info) in effect on the date of publication of this document.
   Please review these documents carefully, as they describe your rights
   and restrictions with respect to this document.  Code Components
   extracted from this document must include Revised BSD License text as
   described in Section 4.e of the Trust Legal Provisions and are
   provided without warranty as described in the Revised BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction
   2.  Conventions and Definitions
   3.  Information categorization
   4.  Information distribution properties
     4.1.  Discovery
     4.2.  Information Structure
     4.3.  Providing Information
     4.4.  Collecting information
   5.  Infrastructure properties
   6.  Deployment considerations
   7.  Security Considerations
   8.  IANA Considerations
   9.  Acknowledgements
   10. Normative References
   Authors' Addresses

1.  Introduction

   As the usage of protocols for IP routing within domains has evolved,
   a need has emerged to carry many more different kinds of information
   across the domain in support of the IP handling system.  This has
   resulted in a syndrome informally referred to as treating the IGP
   (the routing system within many domains) as a dump truck.

   This phenomenon results in multiple kinds of problems.  The most
   obvious effect is that the sheer volume of information grows faster
   than the operational systems to support it.  We have seen many cases
   where efforts to add further information to the set are met with
   "that is too much".  This leaves the requestor with a need that is
   hard to meet.  Further, as the IGP operations require (slow) refresh
   of information, we pay additional information propagation costs that
   are not well-matched to the problem.  The net effect is a set of
   needs that are not well-met and which can interfere with effective
   operation of the IGP for its primary purpose.

   This draft outlines an approach to changing the situation.  It starts
   by describing the information carried in the IGP in terms of the
   dynamics relevant to separating the dump truck aspects.  That section
   then describes what appears to be a tractable and useful separation.

   An additional section then starts to describe the interface
   properties that a solution proposal can look at.

   This is followed by a brief description of the infrastructure of a
   solution, while explicitly not picking a mechanism.  There are a few
   properties that are anticipated to be needed by any infrastructure
   addressing this space.

   Finally, and in many ways most importantly, there is a description of
   the deployability issues and properties that need to be recognized to
   make this undertaking effective.

2.  Conventions and Definitions

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT",
   "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and
   "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in
   BCP14 [RFC2119] [RFC8174] when, and only when, they appear in all
   capitals, as shown here.

3.  Information categorization

   To discuss what information can be helpfully unloaded, this draft
   proposes three categories of information.

   1.  Highly dynamic information - This is information that changes
       faster than typical routing information.  An example would be the
       current congestion state of a queue.  This information is not the
       subject of this draft.  How it is handled is left to other
       documents and practices.

   2.  Topological state and similar information - This is the core of
       the job of routing protocols.  This draft does not propose to
       change this.  Information in this category is critical for
       driving forwarding decisions, and changes at a moderate rate.

   3.  Long term stable information - This is information that while
       subject to change as device software or configuration changes, is
       not subject to rapid environmental effects or similar dynamics.
       Examples include node capability information, the set of VPNs a
       node is supporting, and similar.  Link MTU is another example of
       information that can be handled by this system.  Service SIDs are
       an example of information which while currently supported in
       other ways may benefit from this mechanism if it gains traction.
       Whether the supported set of information should include
       information such as link latency for non-radio links is for
       future discussion.  The first important property is that this
       information does not need to be refreshed.  So designs built
       around reliable delivery can be considered.  It is also
       frequently information which is only of interest to a subset of
       nodes.  So a distribution mechanism that does not burden
       uninterested nodes with effort or storage is worth evaluating.

4.  Information distribution properties

   From the point of view of standardization, the important part of this
   proposal is a mechanism to put information into the system, and get
   information out of the system

4.1.  Discovery

   To participate in this system in either or both of the roles of
   information provider or information recipient, a node needs to
   discover an entry point to the system.  It is assumed for purposes of
   discussion that this appears as a list of IP Address / Protocol /
   Port / Higher layer behavior tuples.  The exact encoding is yet to be
   determined, but should leverage existing work in this area.  The
   choice among explicit list, some form of URN/URI, or a different
   representation are considerations to be evaluated later in the
   process.

   As is discussed in the infrastructure section, it is assumed that the
   system appears to be a distributed service.  As such, a node may
   receive multiple identifier tuples.

   It is for further study whether the provision of these identifiers to
   nodes is done via an advertisement in a routing protocol or is
   configured on each participating node.

4.2.  Information Structure

   The information to be handled by the system must have certain
   properties in order for this proposal to be effective.

   Each piece of information needs to be uniquely identified so that the
   system can tell the difference among adding new information, updating
   information, or deleting information.  It is likely that this will be
   achieved via a combination of domain-wide unique identifiers of
   system participants and local generation of identifiers for
   information.

   Information in this offload system needs to be useable in relation to
   the underlying routing system.  As such, advertisements in this
   system will need to use identifiers that correlate with node and link
   identification as understood by the IGP.  To a first approximation,
   one can assume a single style of IGP, and use the identifiers exactly
   as it represents them.  It is worth exploring whether this should be
   generalized.

   To enable distribution of information only to interested parties,
   there also needs to be a standardized way to represent the semantic
   scope (e.g. provider edge devices, devices supporting specific VPNs,
   devices serving as head ends for a particular tunnel technology.)

   Information has to have enough structure and content identification
   that it can be understood.  This implies the use of standardized
   schema of some sort, standardized encoding, and well-defined
   extensibility so that new information can be introduced
   incrementally.  Whether YANG is the right schema, or some other
   already defined candidate is to be used remains to be determined.  It
   is not the goal of this proposal to introduce a new schema language.

4.3.  Providing Information

   Once a node has one or more identifiers for this offload service, it
   contacts the service.  It is presumed that there is some sort of
   registration and authentication process, and that all communication
   with the service will have the capability at least for integrity
   protection.  Whether confidentiality is needed is for further study
   and may well depend upon the specific operational environment.

   Once properly registered, a node provides to the system its
   collection of suitably static information such as nodal capabilities.
   The properties of this information are described above.  Encoding
   details such as whether lengths are used, etc. are for future study.
   A stable definition of this information structure is needed for
   interoperability.  Equally, extensibility is critical as we cannot
   and should not restrict what information is handled by this system.

   Providers of information will need to be able to withdraw information
   they have provided and update the content of specific items.

4.4.  Collecting information

   A node desiring to retrieve information from the system registers and
   authenticates as above.  Following that, it provides a series of
   requests for information.  The common case will be a request for some
   scoped set of information from all contributors, with updates when
   content changes such as new information becoming available,
   information being withdrawn, or an update of content.  In particular,
   this frequently occurs whan a new node joins the operating
   environment.  There is no rush about deleting out-of-date
   information, although explicit deletion does need to be propagated.

5.  Infrastructure properties

   The obvious starting point for such a system is a set of servers
   offering the information handling service.  This must be distributed
   and replicated so as to be resilient across failure of individual
   servers.  It is assumed that the system can be delivered by a
   combination of services co-resident with routers and separate
   software servers, as the operator prefers.

   The infrastructure will need a mechanism so that when new servers
   join the system, such new participants can reliably fetch the data
   set.  It is not expected that the system instances will have
   persistent storage, as, under a full restart, the supporting nodes
   will re-register and provide their information.

   The exact mechanism for doing this may be a distributed database, a
   pub-sub service, or any number of techniques developed in the server
   world.  Assuming we have a stable interface, it is not clear whether
   there is even a need to standardize one or more infrastructure
   handling systems.

6.  Deployment considerations

   This represents a significant change in the information handling
   paradigm of an operational environment.  This leads to the question
   of whether it is practical to deploy this.

   There are clearly a number of existing use cases for which this
   system would improve the overall behavior.  However, it is hard to
   see how vendors and operators would justify the complications of
   changing already deployed, if awkward distribution mechanisms.

   As such, the expected first step would be to define this, and define
   its use for new use cases which are currently emerging and seem to
   place an unfortunate strain on IGPs.  Only once there is traction for
   this approach in operational environments would we then propose
   carrying some of the existing stable information cases in this and,
   if successful, gradually make more use of this approach.

7.  Security Considerations

   Any protocol effort intending to address this problem will need to
   include authentication and confidentiality mechanisms, along with
   analysis of how these mechanisms address the risks of inappropriate
   information disclosure.

8.  IANA Considerations

   This document does not assign or modify any IANA code points.

9.  Acknowledgements

   This document does not yet have any acknowledgements.

10.  Normative References

   [RFC2104]  Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M., and R. Canetti, "HMAC: Keyed-
              Hashing for Message Authentication", RFC 2104,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2104, February 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2104>.

   [RFC2119]  Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
              Requirement Levels", BCP 14, RFC 2119,
              DOI 10.17487/RFC2119, March 1997,
              <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc2119>.

   [RFC8174]  Leiba, B., "Ambiguity of Uppercase vs Lowercase in RFC
              2119 Key Words", BCP 14, RFC 8174, DOI 10.17487/RFC8174,
              May 2017, <https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8174>.

Authors' Addresses

   Joel Halpern
   HPE
   United States of America
   Email: joel.halpern@hpe.com


   Andrew Alston
   Equity Technology Group
   Email: Andrew.alston@equitybank.co.ke
